Documentation: nRF Desktop multi DFU (#11173)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: applications/nrf_desktop/doc/dfu_mcumgr.rst

.. _nrf_desktop_dfu_mcumgr:

Device Firmware Upgrade MCUmgr module
#####################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> The Device Firmware Upgrade MCUmgr module is responsible for performing a Device Firmware Upgrade (DFU) over Bluetooth® LE.

Reviewer: `over Simple Management Protocol (SMP).`
The module does not rely on Bluetooth LE transport.

Reviewer: You could inform that for example you can use the module with Bluetooth LE transport for OTA DFU support.

You can perform the DFU using, for example, the `nRF Connect for Mobile`_ application.
The :guilabel:`DFU` button appears in the tab with the connected Bluetooth® devices.
After pressing the button, you can select the :file:`*.bin` file used for the firmware update.

.. note::
    The Device Firmware Upgrade MCUmgr module implementation is currently marked as experimental because it uses internal MCUmgr API.

Module events
*************

.. include:: event_propagation.rst
    :start-after: table_dfu_mcumgr_start
    :end-before: table_dfu_mcumgr_end

.. note::
    |nrf_desktop_module_event_note|

Configuration
*************

To enable the module, set the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_MCUMGR_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` Kconfig option.

> The module enables the following configurations:

Reviewer: `enables` -> `selects` ? To use exact Kconfig wording

  For details, see :ref:`zephyr:mcumgr_callbacks` in the Zephyr documentation.

  MCUmgr notifications hooks:

    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_IMG_UPLOAD_CHECK_HOOK` - This option enables the MCUmgr upload check hook, which sends image upload requests to the registered callbacks.
    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_IMG_STATUS_HOOKS` - This option enables the MCUmgr image status hooks, which report the DFU status to the registered callbacks.
    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_OS_RESET_HOOK` - This option enables the MCUmgr OS reset hook, which sends reset requests to the registered callbacks.

* MCUmgr dependencies:

  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NET_BUF`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_ZCBOR`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CRC`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_IMG_MANAGER`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_STREAM_FLASH`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FLASH_MAP`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FLASH`

To use the module, you must also enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` Kconfig option.
The DFU over Simple Management Protocol in Zephyr is supported only with the MCUboot bootloader.

> You must also enable the preferred DFU transport option for the MCUmgr module (for example, the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_TRANSPORT_BT` Kconfig option).

Reviewer: preferred transport for the MCUmgr's SMP protocol

With the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_TRANSPORT_BT` Kconfig option enabled, the module enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_SMP_TRANSFER_EVENTS` event.

> The event is used to lower Bluetooth connection latency during the DFU process.

Reviewer: `is used` -> `can be used`
The module does not do it automatically, so the new wording may prevent misunderstandings here

> 

Author: thanks

> The DFU module leverages the :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu_lock` to synchronize flash access with other DFU methods (for example, the Config Channel DFU).

Reviewer: maybe link to config channel DFU module doc here?

Author: sure

Set the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_LOCK <config_desktop_app_options>` Kconfig option to enable this feature.
Make sure that the DFU lock utility is enabled if your nRF Desktop application configuration uses multiple DFU transports.

You cannot use this module with the :ref:`caf_ble_smp`.
In other words, you cannot simultaneously enable the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_MCUMGR_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option and the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_SMP` Kconfig option.

Implementation details
**********************

> 

Reviewer: The module uses MCUmgr's image notification callbacks for the following purposes:

* To periodically submit an :c:struct:`ble_smp_transfer_event` while image upload is in progress.
   The module registers itself as the final subscriber of the event to track the number of submitted events.
   If a :c:struct:`ble_smp_transfer_event` was already submitted, but was not yet processed, the module desists from submitting subsequent event.
* To reject image upload or system reboot request if :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu_lock` is already taken by another DFU transport.

Reviewer: The `img_mgmt_reset_upload` function that is part of the MCUmgr internal API is used to clear state of the image upload if another DFU transport claims the DFU lock.

Author: thanks

> The DFU MCUmgr implementation is similar to the :ref:`lib_caf` (CAF) implementation.

Reviewer: I would not refer to the CAF module implementation here (we use separate code base, naming varies too).

.. _nrf_desktop_dfu_mcumgr:

Device Firmware Upgrade MCUmgr module
#####################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

The Device Firmware Upgrade MCUmgr module is responsible for performing a Device Firmware Upgrade (DFU) over Simple Management Protocol (SMP).

You can perform the DFU using, for example, the `nRF Connect for Mobile`_ application.
The :guilabel:`DFU` button appears in the tab with the connected Bluetooth® devices.

> After pressing the button, you can select the :file:`*.bin` file used for the firmware update.

Reviewer: Please remember to add link to general nRF Desktop doc here that informs which file to use (may be done as follow-up PR).

Author: moved to follow-up

  For details, see :ref:`zephyr:mcumgr_callbacks` in the Zephyr documentation.

  MCUmgr notifications hooks:

    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_IMG_UPLOAD_CHECK_HOOK` - This option enables the MCUmgr upload check hook, which sends image upload requests to the registered callbacks.
    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_IMG_STATUS_HOOKS` - This option enables the MCUmgr image status hooks, which report the DFU status to the registered callbacks.
    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_OS_RESET_HOOK` - This option enables the MCUmgr OS reset hook, which sends reset requests to the registered callbacks.

* MCUmgr dependencies:

  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NET_BUF`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_ZCBOR`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CRC`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_IMG_MANAGER`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_STREAM_FLASH`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FLASH_MAP`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FLASH`

To use the module, you must also enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` Kconfig option.
The DFU over Simple Management Protocol in Zephyr is supported only with the MCUboot bootloader.

> 

Reviewer: By default, the MCUmgr DFU module confirms the image calling :c:func:boot_write_img_confirmed during the system boot.

> Make sure that :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_MCUMGR_MCUBOOT_DIRECT_XIP` Kconfig option is enabled if devices uses MCUboot bootloader in direct-xip mode.

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
Make sure that :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_MCUMGR_MCUBOOT_DIRECT_XIP` Kconfig option is enabled if devices use the MCUboot bootloader in direct-xip mode.
```

The event can be used to lower Bluetooth connection latency during the DFU process.

The DFU module leverages the :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu_lock` to synchronize flash access with other DFU methods (for example, the :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu`).
Set the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_LOCK <config_desktop_app_options>` Kconfig option to enable this feature.
Make sure that the DFU lock utility is enabled if your nRF Desktop application configuration uses multiple DFU transports.

You cannot use this module with the :ref:`caf_ble_smp`.
In other words, you cannot simultaneously enable the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_MCUMGR_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option and the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_SMP` Kconfig option.

Implementation details
**********************

The module uses MCUmgr's image notification callbacks for the following purposes:

* To periodically submit an :c:struct:`ble_smp_transfer_event` while image upload is in progress.
  The module registers itself as the final subscriber of the event to track the number of submitted events.

>   If a :c:struct:`ble_smp_transfer_event` was already submitted, but was not yet processed, the module desists from submitting subsequent event.

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
  If a :c:struct:`ble_smp_transfer_event` was already submitted, but was not yet processed, the module desists from submitting subsequent events.
```

.. _nrf_desktop_dfu_mcumgr:

Device Firmware Upgrade MCUmgr module
#####################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

The Device Firmware Upgrade MCUmgr module is responsible for performing a Device Firmware Upgrade (DFU) over Simple Management Protocol (SMP).

> You can perform the DFU using, for example, the `nRF Connect for Mobile`_ application.

Reviewer: `If you enable the Bluetooth LE as transport ... `

The :guilabel:`DFU` button appears in the tab with the connected Bluetooth® devices.
After pressing the button, you can select the :file:`*.bin` file used for the firmware update.

.. note::

>     The Device Firmware Upgrade MCUmgr module implementation is currently marked as experimental because it uses internal MCUmgr API.

Reviewer 3: well this is about to explode then, why is it using internal MCUmgr API?

Reviewer 3: Please message me with details on what internal API this is using

Module events
*************

.. include:: event_propagation.rst
    :start-after: table_dfu_mcumgr_start
    :end-before: table_dfu_mcumgr_end

.. note::
    |nrf_desktop_module_event_note|

Configuration
*************

> To enable the module, set the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_MCUMGR_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` Kconfig option.

Reviewer 3: As above

    For details, see :ref:`zephyr:device_mgmt` in the Zephyr documentation.

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_MGMT_NOTIFICATION_HOOKS` - This option enables the MCUmgr notification hook support, which allows the module to listen for an MCUmgr event.
  For details, see :ref:`zephyr:mcumgr_callbacks` in the Zephyr documentation.

  MCUmgr notifications hooks:

    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_IMG_UPLOAD_CHECK_HOOK` - This option enables the MCUmgr upload check hook, which sends image upload requests to the registered callbacks.
    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_IMG_STATUS_HOOKS` - This option enables the MCUmgr image status hooks, which report the DFU status to the registered callbacks.
    * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_GRP_OS_RESET_HOOK` - This option enables the MCUmgr OS reset hook, which sends reset requests to the registered callbacks.

* MCUmgr dependencies:

  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_NET_BUF`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_ZCBOR`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CRC`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_IMG_MANAGER`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_STREAM_FLASH`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FLASH_MAP`
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FLASH`

> To use the module, you must also enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` Kconfig option.

Reviewer 3: this will need updating for sysbuild

The DFU over Simple Management Protocol in Zephyr is supported only with the MCUboot bootloader.

> By default, the MCUmgr DFU module confirms the image using the :c:func:`boot_write_img_confirmed` function during the system boot.

Reviewer: Move the sentence below the empty line (it belongs to next paragraph).

If the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_MCUMGR_MCUBOOT_DIRECT_XIP` option is enabled, the MCUmgr DFU module assumes that the bootloader simply boots the image with a higher version and does not confirm the newly updated image after a successful boot.
Make sure that :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_MCUMGR_MCUBOOT_DIRECT_XIP` Kconfig option is enabled if devices use the MCUboot bootloader in direct-xip mode.
The option is enabled by default if :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BOOT_BUILD_DIRECT_XIP_VARIANT` is enabled.

You must also enable the preferred transport for the MCUmgr's SMP protocol (for example, the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_TRANSPORT_BT` Kconfig option).
With the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUMGR_TRANSPORT_BT` Kconfig option enabled, the module enables the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_SMP_TRANSFER_EVENTS` event.
The event can be used to lower Bluetooth connection latency during the DFU process.

The DFU module leverages the :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu_lock` to synchronize flash access with other DFU methods (for example, the :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu`).

> Set the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_LOCK <config_desktop_app_options>` Kconfig option to enable this feature.

Reviewer 3: as above

Make sure that the DFU lock utility is enabled if your nRF Desktop application configuration uses multiple DFU transports.

You cannot use this module with the :ref:`caf_ble_smp`.

> In other words, you cannot simultaneously enable the :ref:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_DFU_MCUMGR_ENABLE <config_desktop_app_options>` option and the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_SMP` Kconfig option.

Reviewer 3: as above

Implementation details
**********************

The module uses MCUmgr's image notification callbacks for the following purposes:

> * To periodically submit an :c:struct:`ble_smp_transfer_event` while image upload is in progress.

Reviewer: `image upload over Bluetooth LE`

  The module registers itself as the final subscriber of the event to track the number of submitted events.
  If a :c:struct:`ble_smp_transfer_event` was already submitted, but was not yet processed, the module desists from submitting subsequent events.
* To reject image upload or system reboot request if :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu_lock` is already taken by another DFU transport.

The DFU MCUmgr implementation uses the :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu_lock`.
On each DFU attempt, the module attempts to claim ownership over the DFU flash using the :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu_lock` API.
It holds the DFU owner status until the DFU process is completed or timed out.

> The module assumes that DFU is timed our if the registered MCUmgr notification hooks are not called for 5 seconds.

Reviewer: timed out
